# International Health Law

**MAUREEN** **BEZUHLY,** **DAVID** **FIDLER,** **MARK** E. **WOJCIK,** **AND** **LANE** **PORTER**


This report reviews legal developments during the year 1996 in the field of public international
health law. The report summarizes developments in: international agreements; judicial decisions
by international and foreign bodies; international and regional organizations activities; as well
as U.S. legislation and agency actions. The primary focus is on the international control of
disease, e.g., tobacco, as well as AIDS, and other emerging and reemerging infectious diseases.


I. International Tobacco Control


At its January 1996 meeting, the World Health Organization (WHO) Executive Board'
recommended that the World Health Assembly (meeting in May 1996) adopt a resolutionthat urges all WHO Member States (and where applicable agencies of the United Nations
system and other international organizations) to implement progressively comprehensive tobacco
control strategies that include comprehensive, multisectoral, long-term tobacco control strategies. [2 ] The resolution also requested the WHO Director General: (1) to initiate the development
of a framework convention for tobacco control in accordance with Article 19 of the WHO

Constitution; and (2) to include as part of this framework convention a strategy to encourage
Member States to move progressively towards the adoption of comprehensive tobacco control
policies and also to address tobacco control issues that transcend national boundaries.


**II.** Judicial Decisions **by** International and Foreign Bodies


A. **INTERNATIONAL** **COURT** **OF** **JUSTICE**


Legality of Use of Nuclear Weapons 4 in Armed Conflict' (Request for Advisory Opinion
by the World [Health ] [Organization)]


Maureen Bezuhly, David Fidler, Mark E. Wojcik, and Lane Porter are the authors of this report. Maureen Bezuhly
is a member of the firm Fischbein, Badillo, Wagner & Harding in New York City. David Fidler is a professor at
Indiana University Law School in Bloomington. Mark E. Wojcik is a professor at the John Marshall Law School in
Chicago. Lane Porter is chair of the International Health Law Committee, liaison to the **ABA** Standing Committee
on Substance Abuse, and liaison to the **ABA** AIDS Coordinating Committee. He works in Washington, D.C.

**1.** An international framework convention for tobacco control, EB97.R8, Jan. **23,** _1996._
2. Such strategies are to be consistent with resolutions adopted by the World Health Assembly, i.e., Resolutions WHA39.14 and WHA43.16.


**3.** Reference should be made to the report of the International Courts Committee.
4. Legality of the Use of Nuclear Weapons in Armed Conflict, 1996 I.C. No. _**95**_ (Advisory Opinion of
July **8,** 1996).


646 THE **INTERNATIONAL** LAWYER


On July **8,** **1996,** the International Court of Justice issued an advisory opinion [concerning]
the legality of the use of nuclear weapons in armed conflict The ruling followed a plea **by**
both the United Nations General Assembly and the WHO. **Of** significance from [a ] [health]
perspective is the Court's companion opinion, handed down on the same day, which [held ] [that]
WHO lacked standing to request such an advisory opinion.' The companion opinion was
unprecedented in that the Court had never before refused to consider the request of a [specialized]
agency of the [United ] [Nations ] [for ] [an ] [advisory ] [opinion.]

The Court began **by** stating that its power to issue an advisory opinion is exercisable upon
three conditions: **(1)** the agency requesting the opinion must be duly authorized under the
United Nations Charter [8 ] to request advisory opinions; (2) [the ] [opinion ] [requested must ] [address]

a legal question; and **(3)** the question must be one arising [within ] [the ] [scope ] [of ] [the ] [activities ] [of]
the requesting agency.! The Court concluded that WHO had met the first two conditions,
but not the third.


The entire Court readily acknowledged that WHO is duly authorized to deal with the effects
on health of the use of nuclear weapons.'" However, the majority determined [that ] [WHO's]
request related to the _general_ _kgality_ of using nuclear weapons, as opposed to the _bealtb_ _[effects]_
of such use." Because the issue of the general legality of using nudear weapons was found to
be outside the scope of WHO's specialized activities, the Court held that WHO [lacked ] [standing]
to request an advisory opinion."

Three judges dissented with the majority. Judge Shahabuddeen stated that the majority
had misinterpreted the fundamental question submitted **by** WHO." In his [view, ] [WHO's]
question was more reasonably interpreted as whether use of nuclear weapons would violate
WHO's Constitution [4] -not whether use was illegal in general." Judges Weeramantry [and]
Koroma also felt that the majority had misconstrued WHO's question [as ] [merely ] [concerning]
general legality. [6 ] In their collective opinion, WHO's request directly related to WHO's

activities in at least three specific areas: (i) State obligations in regard to health; (ii) State
obligations in regard to the environment; and (iii) State obligations under WHO [Constitu-]
tion.


**All** of the dissenters expressed additional concern over the Court's abrupt departure from
its longstanding practice of routinely granting requests for advisory opinions, unless compelling
circumstances to decline exist.


_**5.**_ _**Id.**_
**6.** Request for Advisory Opinion from the World Health Organization on the Legality of the Use of [Nuclear]
Weapons in Armed Conflict, **1996** **I.CJ.** No. **96/22** **(July** **8).**

_**7.**_ _**Id.**_ at **3** (Weeramantry, **J.,** and Koroma, **J.,** dissenting).
**8.** **U.N.** Charter, art. **96,** 2.
**9.** **1996** **I.C.J.** **96/22** at **I** (Majority Opinion).
**10.** _Id._

**11.** _**Id.**_ at _**`5.`**_

12. _Id._ at _**5-6.**_
**13.** _Id._ at 2 (Shahabuddeen, **J.,** dissenting).
14. Constitution of the World Health Organization, _openedforsignatureJuly_ 22, 1946, **62** [Stat. ] **[2679, ]** **[T.I.A.S.]**
**`No.`** **1808,** 14 **U.N.T.S.** **185.**

_**15.**_ **1996** **I.CJ.** **96/22** at 2 **(Shahabuddeen,** **J.,** dissenting).

**16.** _**Id.**_ at **2-3** (Weeramantry, **J.,** and Koroma, **J.,** dissenting).


VOL. **31,** **NO.** 2


PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW 647


B. **COURT** OF **JUSTICE** OF **THE** **EUROPEAN** COMMUNITIES


_1._ _United_ _Kingdom_ _v._ _**EC.**_ _Commission_ _[7]_


Re: Emergency Measures to Protect Against Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE),

_a/k/a_ "Mad Cow" Disease.


On March 20, 1996, an independent advisory body to the government of the United Kingdom
issued a statement that exposure to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), the so-called
mad cow disease, was the most likely cause of a recently discovered variant of Creutzfeld-Jacob
disease (an incurable disease causing death) in humans. **"** In response to this statement, on March
27, 1996, the E.C. Commission adopted Decision 96/2 _**39,**_ pursuant to which a worldwide ban
on the export of British beef and beef products was immediately imposed.' [9 ] (On June 11,

1996, the preventive measures imposed by Commission Decision 96/239 EC were partially
relaxed [Decision _96/3_ 62 EC], but the worldwide ban on beef exportation for human consumption was continued.) [20]

In or about May 1996, the United Kingdom applied for interim suspension of the worldwide
ban, pending the hearing of its application for the annulment of Decision 96/2 **39.21** On July

12, 1996, the European Court of Justice denied the U.K.'s interim application. [22]

The Court was required to consider three factors in connection with the U.K.'s application.
The first factor was whether a prima facie case for the suspension of Decision _96/239_ existed. [2]

The second factor was whether interim relief was urgent and necessary to avoid serious and
irreparable harm to the United Kingdom. [24 ] The third factor was whether the balance of competing interests favored the United Kingdom. [25 ] In rendering its opinion, the Court held that all
three factors weighed against the United Kingdom.

Among other things, the United Kingdom claimed that a prima facie case for suspension existed
because: (1) Decision 96/239 discriminated against the United Kingdom, (2) Decision 96/239
was motivated solely by improper economic objectives, and **(3)** the Commission was without legal
authority to impose a worldwide ban. [26 ] The Court disagreed on all counts. It was unpersuaded
by the discrimination argument, noting that 97.9 percent of all BSE cases in Europe originated
in the United Kingdom. [27 ] It rejected the "improper motive" argument, finding that the primary
objective of Decision 96/239 was to protect public health in light of the perceived link between
BSE and Creutzfeld-Jacob disease. [28 ] Finally, the Court held that the Commission did not appear
to have overstepped its jurisdictional bounds in imposing a worldwide ban, but, in any event, the
question of whether the Commission has the inherent power to impose a worldwide ban is a
complex legal question not capable of resolution on an interim application. [29]


17. Case 180/96R, United Kingdom v. E.C. Commission (E.C. Council intervening), **3** C.M.L.R. **I** (1996).

**18.** _Id._ at 2.

_19._ _`Id.`_
20. _1996_ OJ. (C239) (1996).
_21._ United Kingdom v. E.C. Commission, **3** C.M.L.R. at 2.
22. _Id._ at **3.**

**23.** _Id._ at **13-15.**

24. _Id._

_25._ _**`Id.`**_

26. _Id._ at 15-16.
27. _Id._ at 18

28. _Id._ at 19-20.

29. _Id._ at 21.


SUMMER 1997


648 THE INTERNATIONAL LAWYER


As to the element of irreparable harm, the Court acknowledged that the British beef industry
was being adversely affected **by** the **BSE** scare. [30 ] However, the Court reasoned that there was
no evidence that Decision 96/239-as opposed to pre-existing bans on British beef imposed
**by** other member states and nonmember countries-was the direct and proximate cause of
these damages."

Finally, in balancing the respective interests, the Court concluded that any alleged harm to
the United Kingdom did not outweigh the serious harm to public health which could be caused
**by** suspension of Decision **96/239.3'** In this regard, the Court stated:


Scientists have as yet only an imperfect knowledge of Creutzfeld-Jacob disease and, more particularly, its recently discovered variant. Its fatal consequences were reiterated several times at the
hearing. There is at present no cure for it. Death ensues several months after diagnosis. Since the

most likely explanation of this fatal disease is exposure to **BSE,** there can be no hesitation. Whilst
acknowledging the economic and social difficulties caused **by** the Commission's decision in the
United Kingdom, the Court cannot but recognize the paramount importance to be accorded to
the protection of health."


**A** ruling on the U.K.'s application for the annulment of Decision **96/2** **39** is not expected
until at least late **1997.** However, the Court's denial of the U.K.'s request for interim relief
is a fair indication that it will continue to place paramount importance on the issue of public

health, notwithstanding the possibility of serious adverse economic consequences.


_2._ _United_ _[Kingdom ]_ _[v. ]_ _**[E. ]**_ _**[C. ]**_ _[Commission]_ _[34]_

Re: 48-Hour Working Time Directive [35]


In **1993,** the **EU** Council of Ministers adopted a 48-Hour Working Time Directive for all
member states (Directive). [6 ] Among other things, the Directive prescribed: **(1)** a ceiling of 48
hours, including overtime, on the average working week; (2) a minimum daily rest period of

**11** consecutive hours; **(3)** a minimum uninterrupted rest period of 24 hours each week, including,
"in principle," Sunday; (4) a maximum average shift of **8** hours for night workers; and _**(5)**_ a
minimum of 4 weeks' paid leave per year. The implementation date of the Directive was
November **23,** **1996."** **[7]**

The United Kingdom was the only member state to apply for annulment of the Directive.
In an opinion handed down on November 12, **1996,** the European Court of Justice denied
the U.K.'s application virtually in its entirely. [33 ] Finding that the **EU** Council of Ministers was
fully empowered to impose the Directive, and adopting a broad interpretation of the terms

"health" and "safety," the Court upheld the U.K.'s challenge only to the limited extent of
ruling that the minimum weekly rest period of 24 hours prescribed **by** the Directive need not
include Sunday."


**30.** _**Id.**_ **at** 22.
**31.** _**Id.**_

**32.** _Id._ at **23.**
_**33.**_ _Id._
34. Case C-84/94, United Kingdom v. **E.U.** Council, **3** C.M.L.R. **671** **(1996).**
_**35.**_ Reference should be made to the report of the International Employment Committee.
**36.** _**Id.**_
**37.** Council Directive 93/104 of Nov. **23,** **1993,** Concerning Certain Aspects of the Organization of Working
Time, **1993.**

**38.** Case C-84/94, United Kingdom v. **E.U.** Council, **3** C.M.L.R. **671** **(1996).**
**39.** _**`Id.`**_ **at** **701.**


VOL. **31,** **NO.** 2


PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW _649_


The United Kingdom advanced several arguments in support of its application for annulment.
The primary argument was based upon the alleged absence of a demonstrable link between
the Directive and health or safety.' In light of such alleged absence, the United Kingdom
claimed that the Directive should have been adopted under a separate **EU** protocol on social
policy from which Great Britain is exempt. [4]

The Court flatly rejected the U.K.'s arguments. It ruled that the terms "working environment," "safety," and "health" are to be broadly construed. [42 ] It held that there is nothing to
indicate that these concepts should "be interpreted restrictively, and not as embracing all factors,
physical or otherwise, capable of affecting the health and safety of the worker in his working
environment." [4] ' The Court thus adopted the definition of "health" contained in the preamble
of the Constitution of the World Health Organization, _i.e.,_ "a state of complete physical, `'`
mental and social well-being [that ] [does ] [not ] [consist ] [only ] [in ] [the ] [absence ] [of ] [illness ] [or ] [infirmity. ] `4`


C. FOREIGN COURTS

```
 Canada

```

On June _13,_ 1996, the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal ruled that its federal government
and other federally regulated industry must provide medical and dental benefits to partners of
gay and lesbian employees. [45 ] A three-member, independent panel 46 said it is "crystal dear" that
the denial of spousal [benefits ] [to ] [same-sex ] [partners ] [is ] [illegal.]

The Tribunal ordered the federal government to supply an inventory of all federal laws,
regulations, and directives that discriminate against same-sex couples. [4] ' The Tribunal further
ordered the federal government to stop applying provisions in all federal collective agreements 4
and health plans which [deny ] [gays ] [and ] [lesbians ] [the ] [same benefits ] [as ] [opposite-sex ] [couples.] 1

The Tribunal's ruling was made retroactive prior to a **1992** Ontario Court of Appeals decision
which determined that sexual orientation is a prohibited ground for discrimination under the
Canadian Human Rights Act. [49]


IlI. Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases


A. INTRODUCTION


Since the 1992 publication of _Emerging_ _Infections:_ _Microbial_ _Threats_ _to_ _**`the`**_ _United_ _States_ by
the Institute of Medicine of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences," [° ] awareness of the threats
posed by emerging and reemerging infectious diseases to the United States has grown rapidly.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the WHO define emerging

and reemerging infectious diseases as "emerging infectious diseases" (EIDs), which are "diseases
of infectious origin whose incidence in humans has increased within the past two decades or


40. _**Id.**_ at 680.

41. _Id._ at 691.

42. _Id._ at 685.

43. _**Id.**_ at 710.

`44.` _`Id.`_ at **711.**

_**45.**_ _`Id.`_

_`46.`_ _Id._

47. _Id._

48. _**Id.**_
49. _**Id.**_

_50._ INsTrruTE **OF** MEDICINE, EMERGING **INFECTIONS:** MICROBIAL **THREATS** **TO** HEALTH **IN** **THE** `UNITED` **STATES**
**`(Joshua`** L. Lederber et al. eds., **1992).**


SUMMER 1997


_**650**_ THE INTERNATIONAL LAWYER


threatens to increase in the near future."'" EIDs were an important topic of political and public
health concern again in 1996 as infectious disease outbreaks in the United States [52 ] and around
the world" demonstrated that EIDs are a serious problem in international relations. In its 1996
annual report, WHO [stated ] [that ] [infectious ] [diseases ] [now ] [constitute ] [a ] ["world ] [crisis."] [ '54]

The problem posed by EIDs to the United States and the rest of the world also began to
attract the attention of international law scholars and practitioners." The International Health
Law Committee sponsored a program entitled _Law_ _and_ _Emerging_ _and_ _Reemerging_ _Infectious_
_Diseases_ at the ABA Annual Meeting in 1996 to help raise awareness about the many international, national, and local [legal issues ] [and ] [challenges raised ] [by ] [the ] [growing ] [global ] [threat ] [of ] [EIDs.1] [6]

Presented below are some of the international legal highlights produced by states attempting to
come to grips with the EID threat.


_1._ _International_ _Agreements_


a. Multilateral Agreements


In May _1995,_ the World Health Assembly" requested the Director-General of WHO to
begin a process for revising the International Health Regulations (IHR) in light of the **`EID`**
threat; and to submit the revised IHR to the World Health Assembly in accordance with
Article 21 of the WHO Constitution." [8 ] The IHR constitute the "only international health
agreement on communicable diseases that is binding on [WHO] member states." [9 ] In December


_**`5`**_ _**1.**_ U.S. **CENTERS FOR DISEASE** CONTROL **AND PREVENTION,** **ADDRESSING** EMERGING INFECTIOuS DISEASE
THREATS: A **PREVENTION** **STRATEGY FOR** **THE** **UNITED** **STATES** **`1`** (1994); WORLD **HEALTH** ORGANIZATION, WORLD

**HEALTH** **REPORT** 1996: **FIGHTING** **DISEASE,** FOSTERING **DEVELOPMENT** **15** (1996) [hereinafter WORLD **HEALTH**

```
REPORT 1996].
```

**52.** A few examples of infectious disease outbreaks in the United States during 1996 include the importation
of the Ebola Reston strain through infected research monkeys from the Philippines, outbreaks of illness in the
United States from consumption of imported raspberries infected with the cyclospora parasite, and sickness caused
by apple juice contaminated with the bacteria _E._ _coli_ 0157:H7.

_**53.**_ Examples of infectious disease outbreaks around the world in 1996 include outbreaks of _E._ _coli_ _0157:_
H7 in Japan and Germany, Ebola outbreaks in Gabon and the movement of Ebola to South Africa via a Gabonese
physician seeking treatment, and the controversy caused within the European Union **by** growing evidence of a
link between "mad cow" disease in British cattle and the human Cruetzfeld-Jacob disease.


54. **WORLD** **HEALTH** REPORT 1996, _`supra`_ note **`51,`** at **`1.`**
_**55.**_ _See,_ _e.g.,_ David P. Fidler, _Globalization,_ _International_ _Law_ _and_ _Emerging_ _Infectious_ _Diseases,_ 2 **EMERGING**

INFECTIOUS DISEASES 77 **(1996);** David P. Fidler, _Mission_ _Impossible?_ _International_ _Law_ _and_ _Infectious_ _Diseases,_ **10**

TEMPLE **INT'L** & COMP. L.J. _**`-_`**_ (1996); Bruce Jay Plotkin, _Mission_ _Possible,_ _The_ _Future_ _of_ _the_ _International_ _Healthb_
_Regulations,_ 10 TEMPLE **INT'L** & CoMp. L. **`J. -_`** (1996); Bruce Jay Plotkin and Ann Marie Kimball, Designing
the International Policy and Legal Framework for Emerging Infection Control: First Steps (draft manuscript);
Allyn L. Taylor, _Controlling_ _the_ _Global_ _Spread_ _of_ _Infectious_ _Diseases:_ _Toward_ _a_ _Reinforced_ _Role_ _for_ _the_ _International_
_Health_ _Regulations,_ 32 HOUSTON L. REv. (forthcoming 1997); and David P. Fidler, _Return_ _of_ _the_ _Fourth Horseman:_
_Emerging_ _Infectious_ _Diseases_ _and_ _International_ _Law,_ 81 MINN. L. REv. (forthcoming 1996).

_**56.**_ _See_ _**`PROGRAM`**_ MATERIALS **`FOR`** LAW **AND EMERGING** **AND** RE-EMERGING **INFEcrIous** DISEASES, Aug. **1996.**
Although not focused on law, the National Health Policy Forum also sponsored a seminar on EIDs in 1996.
_See_ **EMERGING AND** REEMERGING **INFECTIoUs** DISEASES: A **MAJOR** `PUBLiC` HEALTH **CHALLENGE** **NATIONAL** HEALTH

POLICY **FORUM,** **ISSUE BRIEF** No. **686** (1996).

**57.** WHO doc. WHA 48.7 (May 12, _**1995).**_
**58.** World Health Assembly, _Revision_ _and_ _Updating_ _of_ _**the**_ _International_ _Health_ _Regulations,_ WHO Doc. WHA
48.7 (May 12, 1995).

_**59.**_ World Health Organization, _Division_ _ofEmerging_ _and_ _`Otber`_ _Communicabe_ _Diseases_ _Surveillance_ _and_ _Control,_
_Emerging_ _and_ _Other_ _Communicable_ _Diseases_ _Strategic_ _Plan_ _Outline_ _1996-2000_ (WHO/EMC/96. I), at 10 [hereinafter
EMC Strategic Plan].


VOL. **31,** NO. 2


PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW _**651**_


_1995,_ an informal WHO working group made recommendations on revising the IHR. [60 ] In
**1996,** WHO's new Division of Emerging and Other Communicable Diseases Surveillance and
Control **(EMC)** made revision of the IHR part of its mandate. [6] 1 **EMC** began in _1996_ to develop
substantive initiatives on revising the IHR and to develop a timetable for completing the
revision. [62 ] Currently, **EMC** projects that the revision of the IHR **will** be completed by the
end of 1997.63

The importance of the **EID** threat also received emphasis within other multilateral fora in
1996. The members of the Group of Seven industrialized countries included a statement on
the need for international cooperation on infectious diseases in the final Lyon summit statement. [64 ] The participating states in the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation **(APEC)** forum
established a working group on EIDs in **1996.**


b. U.S. Bilateral Efforts


The United States was also active in 1996 incorporating cooperation on EIDs into bilateral
agreements and relationships with other countries. Working groups on EIDs have been established under (1) the United States-European Union Trans-Atlantic Agenda, and (2) the United
States-Japan Common Agenda. Both of these agendas involve multiple issues, including, among
other things, security, trade, environmental protection, and health. Cooperative work on EIDs

is now becoming expressly part of these wide-ranging diplomatic efforts. The action plan on
EIDs in the U.S.-EU Trans-Atlantic Agenda indudes: (1) establishing a task force to develop

and implement an effective global early warning system and response network for infectious
diseases; (2) increased training and professional exchanges on infectious diseases; (3) coordination
of activities with WHO and other relevant international organizations; and (4) bilateral and

multilateral cooperation on health-related matters _(e.g.,_ AIDS and other communicable diseases). [65 ] The U.S.-Japan EID working group first met in August 1996 and has plans to meet
again early in 1997. The United States and Japan hope that their bilateral effort grows into
a Pacific Rim initiative, perhaps in synergy with APEC's efforts.

The United States also launched EID projects with South Africa and Russia in 1996. The
United States would like to see South Africa play a larger role in the global surveillance system
for infectious diseases, and South Africa has expressed serious interest in playing an enhanced
regional and global role. With respect to Russia, the United States and Russia are seeking to
broaden their cooperation on infectious disease control and surveillance from a focus on diphtheria into the wider threats posed by EIDs.


60. World Health Organization, _Division_ _of_ _Emerging_ _and_ _Otber_ _Communicable_ _Diseases_ _Surveillance_ _and_ _Control,_
_Tbe_ _International_ _Response to_ _Epidemics_ _and_ _Applications_ _of_ _the_ _International_ _Healtb_ _Regulations: Report_ _of_ _a_ _WHO_
_Informal_ _Consultation_ (Dec. 11-14, 1995) (WHO/EMC/IHR/96. 1) [hereinafter _Report_ _of_ _WHO_ _Informal_ _Consulta-_
_tion]._

61. EMC **STRATEGIC** **PLAN,** _supra_ note _**57,**_ at 4.
62. Informal Working Group Discussion on the Revision of the International Health Regulations, Sept. 11,
1996 (Unpublished manuscript by EMC Director, on file with authors).


_**63.**_ _Id._

64. _Toward Greater_ _Security_ _and_ _Stability_ _in_ _a_ _More_ _Cooperative_ _World,_ June 29, 1996, _available_ _in_ LEXIS,
News Library, Curnws File.

_65._ _The_ _New_ _Transatlantic_ _Agenda,_ _available_ _at_ <http://europa.eu.int/en/agenda/trO6ap2.html#ii7>.


SUMMER 1997


652 THE INTERNATIONAL LAWYER


_2._ _International_ _and_ _Regional_ _Organizations'_ _Activities_


a. WHO


WHO was very busy with EID issues during 1996. WHO's 1996 annual report, _Figbting_
_Disease,_ _Fostering_ _Development,_ focused on the world infectious disease crisis. [66 ] WHO's new
division (EMC) dedicated to the surveillance and control of infectious diseases adopted its first
strategic plan in 1996.67 EMC also began taking steps to achieve its four strategic goals:
(1) to strengthen the global surveillance of infectious diseases; (2) to strengthen the [national]
and international infrastructure necessary to recognize, report, and respond to EIDs; (3) `to`
strengthen national and international capacity for the prevention [and ] [control ] [of ] [infectious]
diseases; and (4) to support and promote infectious disease control research. [68 ] WHO rapid

response teams-part of EMC's effort to strengthen national and international infectious disease
control-have frequendy been in action in 1996, most notably dealing with Ebola outbreaks
in Gabon.

The World Health Assembly decided in 1996 that the last remaining samples of the smallpox
virus shall be destroyed in 1999, formally ending one of the great international public health
crusades of this century. The World Health Assembly also designated that EIDs will be the
focus of the World Health Day in 1997.


b. PAHO


Meeting in June 1996, the Executive Committee, of the Directing Council, Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO) (which is also the WHO Regional Office for The Americas)
adopted Resolution CE 118.RI 3, concerning hemispheric measures for the control of _[Aedes]_
_aegypti_ (a type of mosquito infesting many major cities especially in the Americas) as a means
of controlling dengue (a severe influenza-like illness) and urban yellow fever (a mosquito-borne
virus disease occurring in tropical regions of South America, causing fever, prostration, nausea,
and vomiting). [69]


c. European Union


(Proposal to Establish Community Infectious Disease Surveillance System) On March 7,
1996, the European Commission submitted a proposal for European Parliament and Council
decision to create a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable
diseases in the European Community. [70 ] A Commission Communication on communicable

disease surveillance networks in the European Community accompanied the proposal. [7] ' The
Communication provides a review of existing infectious disease surveillance in the European
Community. The European Commission's "proposal seeks to establish a system of close cooperation and effective coordination between Member States in the field of surveillance, both routine
and emergency, with a view to improving the prevention and control of a certain number of
serious communicable diseases which necessitate introduction of measures for the protection of


66. World Health Report _**`1996,`**_ _`supra`_ note _**51.**_
67. EMC Strategic Plan, _supra_ note _51._
_68._ _`Id.`_ at 2.
69. Final Report, Executive Committee, of the Directing Council, Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO), 118th Meeting, Washington, D.C., June 1996, CEI 18/FR (Eng.), 27 June 1996, at pages 31-33.

70. _1996_ **`O.J.`** (No. C 123) 10 (1996).
71. Commission Communication Concerning Communicable Diseases Surveillance Networks in the European
Communities, COM (96) final at 78 (Mar. 7, 1996).


VOL. 31, NO. 2


PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW _653_


populations." [72 ] Article 1 of the proposal states that "[a] general network for the epidemiological
surveillance and control of communicable disease shall beset up in the European Community.""

On November **16,** **1996,** the Health Ministers of the European Union discussed at their
Council meeting the European Commission's proposal to establish a Community-wide infectious
disease surveillance network. According to press reports, the Health Ministers "showed reluctance" in their discussions about the proposal, which "led only to an agreement ' that the issue
should be discussed [at ] [more ] [length ] [.] [ .] [ .] [ in ] [the ] [first ] [half ] [of ] [next ] [year.],1 [4]


On November 21, _**1996,**_ the European Parliament made amendments to the Commission's
proposal. [75 ] According to press reports, members of the European Parliament requested that the
network for communicable disease control also include early warning and that the communicable
disease effort be more centralized. [7] [6 ] French European Parliament member Christian Cabrol
stated that "subsidiarity must give way to security" in the public health context." The European
Parliament amendments and arguments will be taken up when the Council takes up the issue
again in **1997.**


3. _U.S._ _Legislation_ _and_ _Agency_ _Actions_


a. Agency Actions


In 1994, the CDC published a major strategic plan for the United States on addressing the
EID threat. [7] " In _1995,_ in response to the CDC's report, the United States government interagency Working Group on Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases (CISET Working
Group) was formed and published another major report with recommendations for the United
States' strategy to combat EIDs. [79 ] In April **1996,** the CISET Working Group established four
subcommittees to develop implementation strategies for the CISET Report's recommendations." [0 ] The work of the subcommittees has been progressing throughout 1996.

The work of the CDC and CISET Working Group received a significant boost in June
**1996** when Vice President Gore announced the Clinton administration's new infectious disease

policy, which elevated national and international infectious disease control and prevention on
the U.S. political and public health agenda. Much of the Clinton administration's new infectious

disease policy seeks to develop a global surveillance and response system to detect, control,
and prevent EIDs. [8] '

Eventually, the work of the CDC and the CISET Working Group and the Clinton administra

72. _Id._
**73.** _**1996**_ **OJ.** **(C** **123)** **10.**
74. _Health_ _Ministers_ _Discuss Disease_ _Network_ _and_ _EU_ _Health_ _Card,_ European Europe, Nov. **16,** **1996,** _available_
_in_ **LEXIS,** News Library, Curnws **File.**

_75._ _See_ _EP_ _Modifies_ _Proposals_ _on_ _a_ _Network_ _for_ _Surveillance_ _of_ _Communicable_ _Diseases_ _and_ _AIDS_ _in_ _Developing_
_Countries,_ Agence Europe, Nov. 22, _1996,_ _available_ _in_ LEXIS, News Library, Cumws File.

76. _**Id.**_

77. _Id._

78. U.S. CENTERS **FOR** **DISEASE** **CONTROL** **AND** PREVENTION, **ADDRESSING** EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASE

**THREATS** (1994).

79. **NATIONAL** **SCIENCE AND** **TECHNOLOGY** **COUNCIL** CommrrrEE **ON** INTERNATIONAL SCIENCE, **ENGINEERING,**


**AND** **TECHNOLOGY** **WORKING** **GROUP ON EMERGING** **AND RE-EMERGING** **INFECTIOUS DISEASES, INFECTIOUS DISEASES-**
A **GLOBAL** HEALTH **THREAT** _(1995)_ [hereinafter CISET **REPORT].**

**80.** The four subcommittees **are** addressing **respectively** surveillance and response issues, research **and** research
training, capacity building, and outreach.

**81.** _See_ Al Gore, Address Before the National Council **for** International health **(June** 12, 1996); FACT **SHEET:**


**ADDRESSING THE** THREAT **OF EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES,** WHITE HOUSE **OFFICE** **OF SCIENCE AND** **TECHNOLOGY**

POLICY **(June** 12, _1996)._


SUMMER 1997


654 THE INTERNATIONAL LAWYER


tion's new infectious disease strategy will produce proposals for specific legislative actions as
the recommendations move towards actual implementation.


b. U.S. Legislation


Although major legislative activity may be forthcoming in 1997, Congress passed some
legislation related to the global EID problem in 1996. The U.S. Government adopted in 1996
new rules on federal meat inspection largely in response to outbreaks of _E._ _coli_ 0157:H in the
United States in the early 1990s. [82 ] The United States also issued new regulations dealing with
the domestic and international shipment of etiologic agents that have potential for biological
warfare or bioterrorism." Congress also included in the new immigration legislation vaccination
requirements for all immigrants for a specified list of diseases to reduce the threat of disease
importation."


IV. AIDS


A. INTRODUCTION


An estimated 30.6 million people have been infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV) since the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) was first recognized as a
disease. [8 5 ] Responses of international, national, and local organizations over the years have
ranged from compassion to hysteria. Major developments in 1996 demonstrate, at least in
theory, that responses to AIDS should be made within a public health framework that respects
the human rights of those affected by HIV. First, the United Nations undertook a major reform
when it established UNAIDS, a coordinated mechanism to fight HIV by, among other measures,
emphasizing the human rights of persons affected by HIV. Second, it is becoming generally
accepted that various human rights instruments should extend to persons affected by HIV and
AIDS. Third, medical developments in protease inhibitors announced at the 1996 International
AIDS Conference held in Vancouver have turned the public perceptions of AIDS from being
only an inevitably fatal disease to being a disease that may, with access to new medicines, be
treated as a chronic illness. Although this development in AIDS treatment is not a legal development, it may shape future legislation and litigation on AIDS until the emergence of new strains
of HIV that may be resistant to protease inhibitors.


B. **UNAIDS** **ESTABLISHED** TO COORDINATE THE **INTERNATIONAL** FIGHT AGAINST AIDS


AIDS has always presented a complex matrix of scientific, political, social, and legal issues.
In recognition of these and other complex aspects of HIV, the U.N. undertook a major reform
of its own efforts against the disease. In January of 1996, a new Joint U.N. Program on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS) became operational. UNAIDS did more than replace the World Health
Organization's Global Program on AIDS, which was itself a replacement of the World Health
Organization's Special Program on AIDS. The new organization, UNAIDS, is a common effort
of six institutional cosponsors: the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the


82. 21 U.S.C. § 624.
83. 42 U.S.C. § 300.
84. 42 U.S.C. § 13206-7.
_**85.**_ THE GLOBAL AIDS **POLICY** COALITION, AIDS **IN** **THE** WORLD II: GLOBAL **DIMENSIONS,** SOCIAL ROOTS,
**AND** RESPONSES 11 (Jonathan Mann and Daniel Tarantola eds. 1996).


VOL. 31, NO. 2


**PUBLIC** INTERNATIONAL LAW _**655**_


United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the World Health
Organization, and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World
Bank).

UNAIDS may be seen as a unique international initiative for at least three reasons. First,
UNAIDS is the first strategic partnership program of its kind in the U.N. system to coordinate
a variety of efforts against a common health threat. Second, UNAIDS is the first U.N. program
to include nongovernmental organization representation on its governing body, the Program
Coordinating Board. [6 ] The board is comprised of 22 U.N. Member States (including donor
and recipient nations), representatives of the six institutional cosponsors (UNICEF, UNDP,
UNFPA, UNESCO, WHO, and the World Bank), nongovernmental organizations, and persons
living with HIV." The importance of including persons with HIV recognizes that programs can
only be successful if they involve those directly affected **by** the problem. Third, the coordinated
structure of UNAIDS allows the agency to promote human rights as a guiding principle. [8] " As
the influence of UNAIDS and its emphasis on human rights becomes an accepted part of
effective national response programs, the protection of human rights will remain a paramount
consideration.

The creation of UNAIDS may be viewed as a response to calls to streamline the U.N. system
in this post-Cold War era. UNAIDS promises to be more than a model of reform, however.
UNAIDS is poised to create support for coordinated responses to prevent further transmission
of HIV, to provide care and support to persons already infected, and to reduce the vulnerability
of individuals and communities who may be affected **by** HIV.


C. **HUMAN** RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS PROTECT **PERSONS** **wrrH**


HIV **AND** AIDS **AS** "OTHER **STATUS"**


UNAIDS has stated that: "People are entitled to enjoy all human rights without discrimination, induding discrimination based on HIV infection status. These [rights] include the right
to health, travel, and privacy, the right to freedom from sexual violence and coercion, and the
right to the information and means to prevent infection." [8 ] In the first decade of the AIDS
pandemic, most lawyers, legislators, and public health advocates generally discounted international human rights instruments as a framework to consider the rights of persons affected **by**
HIV. [9° ] A common misperception was that public health considerations outweigh the individual
human rights of persons affected **by** HIV. Although there are still many exceptions, it was
gradually recognized that the public health could be protected without violating individual
human rights. In the year 1996, there is growing evidence that human rights instruments
provide a paradigm to promote both human rights and public health.

An example is seen in the August 1996 deliberations of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, a Sub-Commission of the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights. In its resolution on discrimination in the context of HIV or AIDS, the
Sub-Commission recognized that discrimination based on "AIDS or HIV infection, actual or


86. **UNAIDS,** _Fact_ _Sbeet_ (May 1996) (visited Dec..5, _1996)_ <http://www.unaids.org/highband/press/factunen.html **>.**


87. _**Id.**_
**88.** _See,_ _e.g.,_ Commission on Human Rights, **REPORT** **OF** **THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON** **HUMAN** RIGHTS **AND**
**HIV/AIDS,** E/CN./44 (1996).

**89. UNAIDS,** _Fact_ _Sheet,_ _supra_ note 86.
_**90.**_ _See_ Robert M. Jarvis, _Advocacyfor_ _**AIDS**_ _Victims:_ _An_ _International_ _**Law**_ _**Approach,**_ 20 **U.** MiAMI I/NrER-Am.
L. REv. 1 (1988).


SUMMER 1997


_**656**_ THE INTERNATIONAL LAWYER


presumed, is a violation of fundamental rights and freedoms" and that "persons suffering from
disadvantaged socioeconomic or legal status, such as women, children, indigenous peoples,
minorities, refugees, migrants, sex workers, men who are homosexual, injecting drug users and

prisoners, are more vulnerable to the risk of HIV infection owing to limited or no access to
education, health care and social services, and that they suffer disproportionately from the
economic and social consequences of the HIV/AIDS epidemic."

With these and other concerns in mind, the Sub-Commission made two legal pronouncements
of significant interest. First, the Sub-Commission confirmed "that discrimination on the basis
of HIV or AIDS status, actual or presumed, is prohibited by existing international human
rights standards and that the term 'other status' in nondiscrimination provisions in international
human rights texts should be interpreted to cover health status, including HIV/AIDS." Second,
the Sub-Commission confirmed "that it is appropriate to consider HIV/AIDS as a disability
for purposes of protection against discrimination."

The Sub-Commission's first pronouncement that the term "other status" includes persons
affected by HIV applies to documents such as the _Universal_ _Declaration_ _of_ _Human_ _Rights,"_
which provides that all persons are "entitled to all of the rights and freedoms set forth in this
Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, _or_ _other_ _status."_ _[2 ]_ Similar

"other status" language is found in Article 2(2) of _the_ _International_ _Covenant_ _on_ _Economic, Social,_

_and_ _Cultural_ _Rigbts"_ and in Article 2(1) of the _International_ _Covenant_ _on_ _Civil_ _and_ _Political_
_Rigbts.1_ _[4 ]_ Analogous language can also be found in documents such as the _American_ _Declaration_
_of_ _the_ _Rigbts_ _and_ _Duties_ _of_ _Man_ _[9]_ _"_ which provides that "[a]Ul persons are equal before the law
and have the rights and duties established in this Declaration, without distinction as to race,
sex, language, creed _or_ _any_ _other_ _factor."'_ _[6 ]_ Although countries initially signed the _American_
_Declaration_ as a nonbinding declaration of human rights aspirations and political principles, the
_Declaration_ has since evolved into a binding source of international obligation related to a
country's membership in the Organization of American States. [97]

The Sub-Commission's observation made this year that the term "other status" should
include persons affected by HIV builds on the U.N. Commission on Human Rights' 1995
Resolution on HIV/AIDS which confirmed that discrimination based on "AIDS or HIV status,
actual or presumed, is prohibited by existing international human rights standards, and that
the term 'or other status' in non-discrimination provisions in international human rights texts


91. G.A. Res. 217 **A** (III), U.N. GAOR, 3rd `Sess.,` at **71,** U.N. Doc. A/810 (1948), _reprinted_ _in_ RICHARD
B. LILLICH **AND** HuRsr **HANNUM,** **INTERNATIONAL** **HUMAN** RIGHTS-DOCUMENTARY **SUPPLEMENT** 17 **(1995).**

92. _**Id.**_ art. 2 (emphasis added).
**93.** Dec. **16,** **1966,** _entered_ _into_ _force_ Jan. **3,** **1976,** **999** **`U.N.T.S.`** **3,** _reprinted_ _in_ LILLICH, _supra_ note **91,** at
23, 24.

94. Dec. _6,_ _1966,_ _entered_ _into_ _force_ Mar. 23, 1976, 999 **`U.N.T.S.`** 171, _reprinted_ _in_ **LILLICH,** supra note 91,
at 33, 34.

_95._ **`O.A.S.`** Res. XXX, _adopted_ _by_ `the` Ninth International Conference of American States, Bogota (1948),
OEA/Ser. L./V/ll.23/doc. 2 rev. 6 (1979), _reprinted_ _in_ LILLICH, _supra_ note 91, at 137 _(1995)._

_96._ _Id._ art. **11.**
97. _See_ Interpretation of the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man within the Framework
of Article 64 of the American Convention on Human Rights, Advisory Op. OC-10/89 of July 14, 1989, Ser.
A, No. 10 (Inter-Am. Ct. Hum. Rts. 1989); Mark E. Wojcik, _Using_ _International_ _Human_ _Rights_ _Law_ _to_ _Advance_

_`Queer`_ _Rigbts:_ _A_ _Case_ _Study_ _for_ _the_ _American_ _Declaration_ _of_ _the_ _Rigbts_ _and_ _Duties_ _of Man,_ _5 5_ `OHIO` ST. **`LJ.`** 649,
_**653**_ (1994).


VOL. **31,** NO. 2


PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW _**657**_


_can_ _be_ _interpreted_ to cover health status, including HIV/AIDS.'"' It also reconfirms the Sub
Commission's Resolution last year that the "other status" term _"sbould_ _be_ _interpreted_ to cover
health status, including HIV/AIDS.""

The Sub-Commission's second observation from the document circulated in 1996 states
that "it is appropriate to consider HIV/AIDS as a disability for purposes of protection against
discrimination." This pronouncement may implicate, on an international level, documents such
as the _Vienna_ _Declaration_ from the World Conference on Human Rights. Although the _Vienna_
_Declaration_ was ostensibly silent on the rights of persons affected by HIV, it does contain two
provisions on persons with disabilities."o Indeed, the _Vienna_ _Declaration_ has been described as
`"a` quarry whose resources have [yet] to be tapped."'' The disability provisions of the _Vienna_
_Declaration,_ for the first time in 1996, can be read to extend to persons affected by HIV.
Such a result can be seen as a natural development for countries such as the United States," [2]

Canada,'' and Australia" [° ] where disability laws have already been applied to persons affected
by HIV.


D. MEDICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN 1996 MAY CHANGE THE COURSE OF


FUTURE LEGISLATION AND LITIGATION


A major development in drug treatments for persons affected by AIDS may change the
course of governmental responses to the pandemic. Clinical trials released in 1996 showed that
protease inhibitors, when combined with AZT and other antiviral drugs, can reduce a patient's
level of HIV to "undetectable" levels.'° [5 ] "No one can call AIDS an inevitably fatal disease
anymore," exclaimed Peter Piot, director of UNAIDS."' [6 ] Although this treatment can be made
available to many, most persons with HIV live in the developing world where they will not
have access to these drugs. The treatment is also, at the present time, very exact. A person's
failure to comply with the strict regime of drug therapy may thwart the treatment by an entire


98. U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Resolution on HIV/AIDS, Res. 1995/44, adopted Mar. **3,** _1995,_
_reprinted_ _in_ **UN** DP **REGIONAL** PROJECT **ON** HIV **`AND`** **DEVELOPMENT** (NEW **DELHI,** INDIA), HIV LAw, ETHICS **AND**
**HUMAN** RIGHTS 377, 380 (D.C. Jayasuriya, ed., 1995) (emphasis added).

99. U.N. Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, _Resolution_ _on_
_Discrimination_ _in_ _the_ _Context_ _of_ _Human_ _Immunodefiency_ _Virus_ _(HIV)_ _or_ _Acquired_ _Immune_ _Defciency_ _Syndrome_

_(AIDS),_ Res. 1995/21, _adopted_ Aug. 24, _1995,_ _reprinted_ _in_ UN DP REGIONAL PROJECT **ON** HIV **AND** **DEVELOPMENT**
(NEW **DELHI,** **INDIA),** HIV LAW, ETHICS **AND** **HUMAN** RIGHTS 384, 386 (D.C. Jayasuriya, ed., 1995) (emphasis

added).

100. Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (paras. 63-64), World Conference on Human Rights,
U.N. Doc. A/Cont. 15724 (1993).

101. Koen Davidse, _The_ _Vienna_ _World_ _Conference_ _on_ _Human_ _Rights:_ _Bridge_ _to_ _Nowbere_ _or_ _Bridge_ _over_ _Troubled_
_Waters,_ 6 TouRo **INT'L** L. REv. 239, 257 (1995).

102. Under U.S. law, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) defines the "disability" of individuals as
"(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such
individual; (B) a record of such impairment; or (C) being regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C.
§ 12102(2) (1994). Persons affected by HIV have been found to be "disabled" under the ADA, _see,_ _e.g.,_ Doe
v. Kohn, Nast & Graf, 862 F. Supp. 1310 (E.D. Pa. 1994); under the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, _as_
_amended,_ _see,_ _e.g.,_ Doe v. District of Columbia, 796 F. Supp. 559 (D.D.C. 1992); and under various state statutes,
_see,_ _e.g.,_ Raintree Health Care Ctr. v. Illinois Human Rights Comm'n, 672 N.E.2d 1136 _(111._ 1996).

103. _See,_ _e.g.,_ Ontario Human Rights Board to Hear Discrimination Case, 6 AIDS `POL'Y` & `LAw` (BNA), at
6 (Aug. 7, 1991).

104. _See,_ _e.g.,_ X v. Department of Defence, No. H94/98 (Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Comm'n, June 29, _1995),_ _as_ _reported_ _in_ _Sacked_ _Army_ _Recruit Wins_ _HIV_ _Discrimination_ _Case,_ 6 HIV/AIDS **LEGAL**

LINK (No. 3), at 7 (Sept. 1995) (interpreting the Australian Disability Discrimination Act).

105. _See,_ _e.g.,_ H.R. Sheperd, _Still_ _Needed_ _An_ _AIDS_ _Vaccine,_ WALL ST. J., Dec. 3, 1996, at A22.
106. _Id._


SUMMER 1997


658 THE INTERNATIONAL LAWYER


class of protease inhibitors. As persons fail to comply with this regime, it is possible that new
strains of HIV may develop resistance to protease inhibitors, just as some strains now are
resistant to the drug AZT. If this happens, the "cure" described in 1996 will be short-lived.

Until that time, however, nations where persons can afford the expense of protease inhibitors
and related drugs may find a need to adjust their national laws. A person on disability leave,
for example, may find the strength to return to work following a successful treatment. The
disability laws, however, may impede a person from returning to work if that would endanger
health insurance benefits. Persons with HIV can have more productive lives with this treatment,
but the expense will bankrupt many individuals and local governments. If that happens, a
person forced to stop treatment with protease inhibitors may develop strains that are resistant
to further treatment. If the mutated virus spreads to others, treatment with protease inhibitors
may be futile. The potential danger of developing new, resistant strains of HIV should awaken
governments to their own responsibilities to ensure that funds are available to pay for the
treatments. That understanding, however, requires more attention to the problem than most
legislators seem willing to give.


VOL. **31,** NO. 2