# **Introducing Global Health Law**


## Global Health Law

_Lawrence O. Gostin and_

_Benjamin Mason Meier_


**About This Column**


**Lawrence O. Gostin** and
**Benjamin Mason Meier** serve
as the section editors for Global

Health Law. Professor Gostin is
University Professor at Georgetown
University and the Founding Linda
D. & Timothy J. O’Neill Professor of
Global Health Law at Georgetown
University Law Center and Director
of the World Health Organization
Center on National and Global

Health Law. Professor Meier is an

Associate Professor of Global Health
Policy at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill and a Scholar
at the O’Neill Institute for National

and Global Health Law. This column
will feature timely analyses and
perspectives on law, policy, and justice
in global health.



Global health law describes the legal
frameworks that structure global
health. Laws and regulations, when
based on the best available evidence,
can promote healthy behaviors, regu­
late hazardous activities, and ensure
socially responsible corporate mar­
keting and products. These regula­
tory frameworks operate in virtu­
ally every realm of health, including
infectious and noncommunicable
diseases, mental health, injuries, and
the safety and effectiveness of vac­
cines, pharmaceuticals, and medi­
cal products. Law can help structure
universally affordable, accessible,
and equitable health systems that
promote universal health coverage.
Beyond discrete attention to health
risks, the rule of law and good gover­
nance are crucial for ensuring health
and well-being.

Where global health has come to
frame efforts to advance public health
across countries, law has become cru­
cial to addressing the global health
threats that have arisen in a rapidly
globalizing world. Globalization has
unleashed the spread of disease, con­
nected societies in shared vulnerabil­
ity, and highlighted the limitations
of domestic law in ensuring global
determinants of health. In this inter­
connected world, no country acting
alone can stem health hazards that go
beyond national borders. Yet if glo­
balization has presented challenges
to disease prevention and health pro­
motion, global health law offers the
promise of bridging national bound­
aries to advance global norms and
alleviate health inequities.

Arising out of international health
law — which has long structured



**Lawrence O. Gostin, J.D., LL.D. (Hon.)** _, is University Professor at Georgetown_
_University and the Founding Linda D. & Timothy J. O’Neill Professor of Global_
_Health Law at Georgetown University Law Center and Director of the World Health_
_Organization Center on National and Global Health Law._ **Benjamin Mason Meier,**
**J.D., LL.M., Ph.D.,** _is an Associate Professor of Global Health Policy at the Uni­_
_versity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and a Scholar at the O’Neill Institute for_
_National and Global Health Law._



multilateral cooperation to respond
to infectious disease threats — global
health law seeks to structure the con­
temporary governance architecture
for global health. In responding to
health harms throughout the world,
global health law has “evolve[d]
beyond its traditional confines of for­
mal sources and subjects of interna­
tional law” to advance global health
with justice. [1] This focus on global
health has necessitated action beyond
the reach of national governments,
requiring both state and non-state
actors to come together to respond
to globalized health threats. Global
health law seeks to frame this new
governance to respond to the major
health challenges of the twenty-first
century.

The field of global health law has
thus become a basis to conceptualize
the legal institutions that apply to the
changing public health threats, nonstate actors, and regulatory norms
that structure global health. Beyond
the traditional purview of interna­
tional health law, global health law
describes evolving legal efforts to
address:


- New health threats — including

non-communicable disease,
injuries, mental health, dangerous
products, and other globalized
health threats,

- New health actors — including

transnational corporations, private
philanthropists, civil society, and
other non-state actors, and

- New health norms — including

“soft law” instruments, global strat­


tered the widespread national ratifi­
cation required for adoption. [6]

This legislative inertia would not
be broken until widespread scientific
agreement was reached on disease
etiologies and government authori­
ties. By the time of the 1892 Ven­
ice Conference, states had reached
the necessary consensus on public
health practice to draft and ratify a
convention to prevent the spread of
infectious disease. At the eleventh



egies and action plans, and other
normative standards of global
health policy. [2]


Global health law instruments can
codify public health obligations
across the global health landscape,
realizing health and justice — both­
within and among nations. These
legal frameworks can promote good
governance among national and
global institutions, embracing values
of transparency, setting targets, mon­
itoring progress, structuring multi­
sectoral engagement, and facilitating
accountability. As legal scholarship in
global health has expanded, it is nec­
essary to consider global health law
as a distinct part of health law.

This introductory column exam­
ines the development of the field,
detailing the evolving scope and
content of global health law. Begin­
ning in the early history of interna­
tional health law, national govern­
ments have long sought to address
infectious disease threats through
international regulations. This focus
on international health law struc­
tured global governance for health
in the aftermath of World War II,
with the establishment of the World
Health Organization (WHO) bring­
ing states together to respond to
common public health threats. Yet,
WHO’s early efforts to stem the inter­
national spread of infectious diseases
have proven too narrow to meet the
expanding legal challenges faced by a
globalizing world. This column ends
by framing the new field of global
health law and outlining the lead­
ing global health threats that will be
explored in future columns, dem­
onstrating the power of this emerg­
ing field in conceptualizing the legal
response to global health.


**Origins in International Health**
**Law**
Global health law is built upon the
foundations of international health
law. International regulation of pub­
lic health far predates modern health
law, with international agreements
long viewed by states as vital for col­
lective action to safeguard national
economic and security interests. [3]



Borne of a time when medicine was
unable to treat illness, the rapid
transmission of disease along trade
routes forced the major trading pow­
ers to acknowledge that infectious
diseases could no longer be construed
as solely within the sovereign author­
ity of independent states. [4]

This early “sanitary period,” marked
by its emphasis on the prevention
of epidemic disease, determined
the course of international public



health regulation through bilateral,
regional, and multilateral treaties.
The first International Sanitary Con­
ference, held in Paris in 1851, brought
together physicians and diplomats to
reach consensus among those states
having trading interests in the Medi­
terranean basin. [5] These states held a
second conference in Paris in 1859,
with subsequent conferences held
in Constantinople (1866), Vienna
(1874), Washington, DC (1881),
Rome (1885), Venice (1892), Dres­
den (1893), Paris (1894), and again
in Venice (1897). While international
sanitary regulations were crafted at
various points in the long march of
International Sanitary Conferences,
none of these early regulations mus­


## Arising out of international health law — which has long structured multilateral cooperation to respond to infectious disease threats — global health law seeks to structure the contemporary governance architecture for global health. In responding to health harms throughout the world, global health law has “evolve[d] beyond its traditional confines of formal sources and subjects of international law” to advance global health with justice.This focus on global health has necessitated action beyond the reach of national governments, requiring both state and non-state actors to come together to respond to globalized health threats. Global health law seeks to frame this new governance to respond to the major health challenges of the twenty-first century.



International Sanitary Conference in
Paris, delegates in 1903 drafted the
first International Sanitary Regula­
tions of widespread applicability. [7]

The International Sanitary Regu­
lations set the stage for the Interna­
tional Health Regulations (IHR) that
followed and laid the groundwork
following World War II for the devel­
opment of international health law
through WHO.


**Foundations of Global**

**Governance for Health**
The 1946 WHO Constitution would
be the first treaty to codify states’
expansive post-war mandate for
medical care and underlying determi­
nants of health, with WHO’s consti­


ing most directly on states, which
exercise only limited influence on
the global forces that underlie pub­
lic health, the underlying conditions
for health are increasingly shaped
by non-state actors, including global
institutions, transnational corpora­
tions, individual philanthropists, and
civil society. As international health



tutional framework piercing the veil
of national sovereignty to respond
to public health threats throughout
the world. Complemented by a wide
range of other United Nations agen­
cies, which would support an expan­
sive array of health determinants
under their respective institutional
mandates, WHO would have consti­
tutional authority to adopt conven­
tions, regulations, and recommenda­
tions on any public health matter. [8]
With this international legal author­
ity to set regulatory norms for public
health, WHO assumed responsibility
for the IHR, creating a harmonized
surveillance and reporting system for
infectious disease control and setting
both binding state obligations and
permissible limitations on individ­
ual rights and commercial interests
for disease prevention. [9] However,
beyond the IHR (last revised in 2005
to address past IHR weaknesses and
reflect modern health threats), WHO
has rarely exercised its lawmak­
ing powers, with states in the World
Health Assembly employing WHO’s
legal authority to develop only two
other treaties: the 1967 Nomen­
clature Regulations and the 2003
Framework Convention on Tobacco

Control.


There are limits to international
health law in creating universal legal
standards to ameliorate global health
inequities. Where once public health
was a central focus of international
negotiation, the international regu­
lation of public health has waned in
international relations, as states have
avoided limitations on their sovereign
authority. [10] Because of the state-cen­
tric nature of international law, these
international health agreements have
been focused on infectious diseases
(that threaten security interests),
dependent on voluntary agreement
(exclusively by sovereign states),
and reliant on international consen­
sus (which results in unenforceable
norms). [11] International health law is
seen as inherently incapable of facili­
tating collective action to address con­
temporary global health priorities. [12]
Although international health law
remains a necessary area of research
and practice, framingmultilateral
cooperation to respond to global



Figure 1
**International Sanitary Conference**


Figure 2
**World Health Assembly**


health security threats, such narrow
legal frameworks are incommensu­
rate with the rising health threats of a
rapidly globalizing world. [13]

International health law cannot
speak to contemporary changes in
statehood, international relations,
and global public goods for health.
With public international law bear­


Figure 3
**WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus**



In an expanding global health
governance landscape, safeguarding
the public’s health requires coop­
eration among state and non-state
actors, and this coordination can be
fostered through global health law.
International health law continues
to govern the actions of national gov­
ernments, especially where binding
obligations on states are necessary
to prevent infectious disease through
state action; [21] however, international
relations between states does not
encompass the entirety of contem­
porary global health diplomacy. [22]
Shifting from international health
law (applicable to states) to global
health law (applied to both state and
non-state actors), a multi-level pro­
liferation of international, national,
nongovernmental, and corporate
actors have organized to address
a multi-sectoral array of determi­
nants of health. [23] Global health law
can frame this expanding landscape
for global health, coordinating the
global community of state and nonstate actors through institutions of
global governance. [24]

Global health law shapes the legal
foundation of global governance for
health. Global governance has become
crucial in developing legal norms and
implementing those norms through
global institutions. [25] Operating under
global health law, well governed
institutions can be more effective in
setting standards, coordinating dis­
parate actors, forming partnerships
with key stakeholders, and developing
consensus on shared goals for global
health. [26] These new instruments of
global health law endow global insti­
tutions with the tools to negotiate a
shared vision of good governance for
global health, coordinate with other
organizations across sectors, and align
national law with global health law to
advance public health throughout the
world. [27] Facilitating accountability
for these global health goals, global
health law can provide an institutional
basis for developing benchmarks,
monitoring progress, and enhancing
compliance. [28]

The application of global health
law can thereby establish a norma­
tive framework for achieving global
health with justice. In creating an



law has lost the capacity to influence
public health across the world, “global
health” has become the dominant ter­
minology to describe the interdepen­
dent needs of all peoples, rather than
those of particular countries, and the
global action necessary to meet these
needs across nations, actors, and sec­
tors. [14] This focus on global health,
addressing global determinants of
public health, demands an expanded
scope and influence of health law to
meet the public health needs of an
interconnected world, redressing
health inequities within and across
countries through global health law. [15]


**Applications to a Globalizing**
**World**

Law is crucial to the advancement of
global health. Structuring health out­
comes through law, legal instruments
shape underlying determinants of
global health, and these “legal deter­
minants of health” provide a path to
safeguard public health in a global­
izing world. [16] Yet legal capacities and
government authorities differ greatly
across countries, undercutting efforts
to assure global equity in health. [17]
There is a rising need for evidencebased law reforms — in all countries
and through global governance. [18]
Global health law presents a legal



framework to structure new efforts
by the global community to advance
global health. [19]

Looking beyond the regulation of
states through international treaty
law, global health law can apply new
sources of soft law to facilitate coop­
eration across state and non-state
actors, frame new institutions of
global governance, and realize global
health with justice.

Global health law applies “soft” law
in global health policy. Where once
international health law was the only
option for states to address issues of
international health, contemporary
soft law instruments (including nonbinding international resolutions,
global strategies, and codes of prac­
tice) have proven far easier to negoti­
ate without the need for formal state
ratification. [20] While lacking the legal
enforceability of international law,
soft law nevertheless codifies global
consensus to set priorities, mobilize
constituencies, create incentives,
coordinate actors, and facilitate
accountability. Without the practi­
cal need to develop international
law, global health law applies new
sources of soft law to bind the state
and non-state actors that influence
global health.


imperative for global health insti­
tutions to meet an expanding set
of global challenges to underlying
determinants of health, global health
law can codify normative frame­
works to realize the human rights
that underlie global health. [29] As the
limitations of international law have
moved global health law beyond the
confines of international legal agree­
ments, stakeholders have engaged a
diverse array of state and non-state
actors through the rise of new policy
institutions — institutions developed
through their normative foundations
in justice. [30] Global health law can
solidify these vital norms for justice
across institutions, providing a foun­
dation for human rights in global
health. [31]


**Column on Global Health Law**
The expansion of health law schol­
arship to encompass global health
law has laid out a legal framework to
structure efforts by the global com­
munity to advance public health.
Through hard and soft law norm-set­
ting, global health law seeks to create
new policy institutions to alter behav­
iors, sustain funding, and coordinate
partnerships. [32] Global health law
extends beyond the scope of discrete
health-focused international legal
agreements between national gov­
ernments — addressing an encom­
passing set of global health determi­
nants through the obligations of state
and non-state actors, structuring new
forms of global governance reflective
of the major global health threats,
and framing the normative foun­
dations necessary to realize global
health with justice.

This column will seek to capture
these contemporary advances in
the theory, research, and practice of
global health law. Early columns will
focus on the role of law in:


- global health security and the

International Health Regulations,

- non-communicable diseases and

WHO framework conventions,

- universal health coverage under

the Sustainable Development
Goals,




- immunization law to achieve wide­

spread vaccination and disease
prevention,

- zoonotic disease and the need for

laws at the intersection of public
health, animal health, and environ­
mental health,

- international trade law in structur­

ing commercial determinants of
health,

- planetary health and laws to miti­

gate and adapt to climate change,
and

- human rights law as a foundation

of global health governance.


This quarterly examination of con­
temporary advances in global health
law will build the research founda­
tion for global health law reforms,
analyze evidence-based legal inter­
ventions that promote public health,
and explore the normative influence
of human rights in global health.
Through these columns, it will be
possible to develop an understand­
ing of legal “best practices in global
health,” extending policy surveillance
and legal epidemiology globally to
understand how law reforms can best
succeed in improving public health.


**Conclusion**
With the rise of the field of global health
law, this column seeks to expand the
reach of this interdisciplinary scholar­
ship as part of the larger field of health
law. Global health law has become
central to health law in a globalizing
world, and it is necessary to broaden
the links between domestic and global
health law in legal theory, empirical
research, and normative application.
Extending burgeoning global health
analysis in the _Journal of Law, Medi­_
_cine & Ethics_, this column will pro­
vide a home for scholars to apply legal
analysis to promote global health,
serving as a central resource for aca­
demics, practitioners, and advocates
in the years to come.


Note
The authors are grateful to Lindsay Wiley,
Montrece Ransom, Edward Hutchinson,
and Aaron Kesselheim for recognizing
the importance of global health law to the
advancement of health law and for provid­



ing thoughtful advice in developing this
inaugural column. The authors have no
conflicts to declare.


References
1. L.O. Gostin and A.L. Taylor, “Global
Health Law: A Definition and Grand
Challenges,” _Public Health Ethics_ 1, no.
1 (2008): 53–63, 55.
2. L.O. Gostin, _Global Health Law_ (Cam­
bridge: Harvard University Press,
2014).
3. O. Aginam, _Global Health Governance:_
_International Law and Public Health_
_in a Divided World_ (Toronto: Univer­
sity of Toronto Press, 2005).
4. D.P. Fidler, _International Law and_
_Infectious Diseases_ (New York: Claren­
don Press, 1999).
5. D.P. Fidler, “The Globalization of
Public Health: The First 100 Years of
International Health Diplomacy,” _Bul­_
_letin of the World Health Organization_
79, no. 9 (2001): 842-849.
6. N. Howard-Jones, _The Scientific Back­_
_ground of the International Sanitary_
_Conferences, 1851-1938_ (Geneva: World
Health Organization, 1975).
7. D. Porter, _Health, Civilization and the_
_State: A History of Public Health from_
_Ancient to Modern Times_ (New York:
Routledge, 1998).
8. _Constitution of the World Health Orga­_
_nization_ (Geneva: World Health Orga­
nization, 1946).
9. Burci, Gian Luca and C.-H. Vignes, _The_
_World Health Organization_ (London:
Kluwer Law International, 2004).
10. L.O. Gostin, “World Health Law:
Toward a New Conception of Global
Health Governance for the 21st Cen­
tury,” _Yale Journal of Health Policy,_
_Law & Ethics_ 5, no. 1 (2005): 413–424.
11. S.J. Hoffman, J.-A. Røttingen, and J.
Frenk, “Assessing Proposals for New
Global Health Treaties: An Analytic
Framework,” _American Journal of Pub­_
_lic Health_ 105, no. 8: 1523-1530.
12. L.O. Gostin, “Meeting Basic Survival
Needs of the World’s Least Healthy
People: Toward a Framework Con­
vention on Global Health,” _George­_
_town Law Journal_ 96, no. 2 (2008):
331–392.
13. R. Magnusson, “Non-Communicable
Diseases and Global Health Gover­
nance: Enhancing Global Processes to
Improve Health Development,” _Glo­_
_balization and Health_ 3, no. 2 (2007):
1–16.
14. T.M. Brown, M. Cueto, and E. Fee,“The
World Health Organization and the
Transition from ‘International’ to
‘Global’ Public Health,” _American Jour­_
_nal of Public Health_ 96, no. 1 (2006):
62–72.
15. S. Moon, “Global Health Law and Gov­
ernance: Concepts, Tools, Actors and
Power,” in G.-L. Burci and B. Toebes
(eds) _Research Handbook on Global_


_Health Law_ (Northampton: Edgar,
2006): 24-54.
16. L.O. Gostin, J.T. Monahan, J. Kaldor,
M. DeBartolo, E. Friedman, et al., “The
Legal Determinants of Health: Har­
nessing the Power of Law for Global
Health and Sustainable Development,”
_The Lancet_ 393, no. 10183 (2006):
P1857-1910.
17. L.O. Gostin, “The Lancet Commission
on Global Health Law: The Transfor­
mative Power of Law to Advance the
Right to Health,” _Journal of Global_
_Health Science_ 1, no. 1 (2019): e5.
18. S.J. Hoffman, M.J.P. Poirier,
S.R.Van Katwyk, P. Baral, and L.
Sritharan,“Impact of the WHO Frame­
work Convention on Tobacco Control
on Global Cigarette Consumption:
Quasi-experimental evaluations using
interrupted time series analysis and insample forecast event Modelling,” _Brit­_
_ish Medical Journal_ 365 (2019): l2287.
19. B. Toebes, “Global Health Law: Defin­
ing the Field,” in G. L. Burci and B.
Toebes (eds). _Research Handbook on_
_Global Health Law_ (Northampton:
Edgar, 2018): 2-23.
20. L. Wiley, “Moving Global Health
Law Upstream: A Critical Appraisal
of Global Health Law as a Tool for
Health Adaptation to Climate Change,”



_Georgetown International Law Review_
22, no. 3 (2010): 439-489.
21. S.E. Davies, A. Kamradt-Scott, and S.
Rushton, _Disease Diplomacy: Interna­_
_tional Norms and Global Health Secu­_
_rity_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni­
versity Press, 2015).
22. I. Kickbusch, G. Silberschmidt, and
P. Buss, “Global Health Diplomacy:
The Need for New Perspectives, Stra­
tegic Approaches and Skills in Global
Health,” _Bulletin of the World Health_
_Organization_ 85, no. 3 (2007):
230-232.
23. N. Szlezák, B.R. Bloom, D.T. Jamison,
G.T. Keusch, C.M. Michaud, S. Moon,
and W.C. Clark, “The Global Health
System: Actors, Norms, and Expecta­
tions in Transition,” _PLoS Medicine_ 7,
no. 1 (2010): e1000183.
24. L.O. Gostin and D. Sridhar “Global
Health and the Law,” _New England_
_Journal of Medicine_ 370 (2014):
1732–1740.
25. N.D. White, “Lawmaking” in J.
K.Cogan, I. Hurd, and I. Johnstone
(eds) _The Oxford Handbook of Interna­_
_tional Organizations_ (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2016).
26. J. Klabbers, _Advanced Introduction to_
_the Law of International Organiza­_
_tions_ (Cheltenham: Elgar, 2015).



27. B.M. Meier and L.O. Gostin, “Fram­
ing Human Rights in Glboal Health
Governance,” in B.M. Meier and L.O.
Gostin (eds) _Human Rights in Global_
_Health: Rights-Based Governance for a_
_Globalizing World_ (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2018): 63-86.
28. Gostin 2014, _supra_ note 2.
29. R. Magnusson, _Advancing the Right_
_to Health: The Vital Role of Law_
(Geneva: World Health Organization,
2017); L.O. Gostin and B.M. Meier, R.
Thomas, V. Magar, and T. A. Ghebr­
eyesus, “70 Years of Human Rights in
Global Health: Drawing on a Conten­
tious Past to Secure a Hopeful Future,”
_The Lancet_ 392 (2018): 2731-2735.
30. J.P. Ruger, _Global Health Justice and_
_Governance_ (Oxford University Press,
2018).
31. B.M. Meier and L.O. Gostin, _Human_
_Rights in Global Health: Rights-Based_
_Governance for a Globalizing World_
(New York: Oxford University Press,
2018).
32. Gostin 2014, _supra_ note 2.